LP: vllm benchmarking with quantised models (#3207)
ArmDeveloperEcosystem/arm-learning-paths: content/learning-paths/servers-and-cloud-computing/vllm-benchmark-quantisation/1-overview-and-setup.md

---

> title: Install vLLM

Reviewer: Setup vLLM ?

weight: 2

### FIXED, DO NOT MODIFY
layout: learningpathall
---

## What is vLLM

> vLLM is an open-source, high-throughput inference and serving engine for large language models (LLMs). It’s designed to maximise hardware efficiency, making LLM inference faster, more memory-efficient, and scalable.

Reviewer 2: would be nice to include a link to vLLM docs / explanation etc.

## Understanding the Llama models

> Llama 3.1 8B is an open-weight, text-only LLM with 8 billion parameters that can understand and generate text. You can view the model card at https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B

Reviewer 3: nit: missing full-stop.

> Quantised models have their weights converted to a lower precision data type, which reduces the memory requirements of the model and can improve performance significantly. In the [Run vLLM inference with INT4 quantization on Arm servers](/learning-paths/servers-and-cloud-computing/vllm-acceleration/) Learning Path we have covered how to quantise a model yourself. There are also many publicly available quantised versions of popular models, such as https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-quantized.w8a8

Reviewer 3: nit: missing full stop.

> Quantised models have their weights converted to a lower precision data type, which reduces the memory requirements of the model and can improve performance significantly. In the [Run vLLM inference with INT4 quantization on Arm servers](/learning-paths/servers-and-cloud-computing/vllm-acceleration/) Learning Path we have covered how to quantise a model yourself. There are also many publicly available quantised versions of popular models, such as https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-quantized.w8a8

Reviewer 2: it'd be nice to say that our kernels utilize I8MM extension and refer to its learning path / docs

Reviewer 3: which LPs?

> The notation w8a8 means that the weights have been quantised to 8-bit integers and the activations (the input data) are dynamically quantised to the same. The recipe used to quantise this model can be found [in the model card](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-quantized.w8a8#creation).

Reviewer 2: would be nice to say a bit more about the quantization scheme: per token activations, channelwise weights.

> The notation w8a8 means that the weights have been quantised to 8-bit integers and the activations (the input data) are dynamically quantised to the same. The recipe used to quantise this model can be found [in the model card](https://huggingface.co/RedHatAI/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-quantized.w8a8#creation).

Reviewer: Do we really need to link the recipe here? The Redhat recipe link can be mentioned once in its own section about quantizing new models along with your script

## Set up your environment

Before you begin, make sure your environment meets these requirements:

- Python 3.12 on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS or newer
- At least 32 vCPUs, 64 GB RAM, and 64 GB of free disk space
This Learning Path was tested on an AWS Graviton4 c8g.12xlarge instance with 200 GB of attached storage.

## Install build dependencies

> Install the following packages required for running inference with vLLM on Arm64:

Reviewer 2: I think we need GCC-12 here, see this page for details: https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/getting_started/installation/cpu/#build-wheel-from-source:~:text=Full%20build%20(with,%C2%B6

Author: That's only if we're building vLLM ourselves. We have another learning path that covers that. I have been told to cover only installing vLLM. I can add a link to that part of the other learning path that covers this if you like?

```bash
sudo apt-get update -y
sudo apt install -y python3.12-venv python3.12-dev
```

> You can optionally install tcmalloc, a fast memory allocator from Google’s gperftools, which improves performance under high concurrency:

Reviewer 2: I'd rather *not* say that it's optional.

```bash
sudo apt-get install -y libtcmalloc-minimal4
```

> {{% notice Note %}}

Reviewer 2: I think this is irrelevant here.

also, ACL is only really used for the unquantized linear layers.

Author: Removed

> On aarch64, vLLM's CPU backend is built with the Arm Compute Library (ACL) through oneDNN.

Reviewer 3: Should we have links out to ACL and oneDNN GH homepages?

Author: Have removed this section

> This ensures optimized Arm kernels are used for matrix multiplications, layer normalization, and activation functions without additional configuration.

Reviewer 2: this line isn't needed.

{{% /notice %}}

## Create and activate a Python virtual environment

It’s best practice to install vLLM inside an isolated environment to prevent conflicts between system and project dependencies:
```bash
python3.12 -m venv vllm_env
source vllm_env/bin/activate
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

> ## Install vLLM for CPU

Reviewer 2: I think we should divide this into section into 2 parts - the reader can choose which one they want:
1. install prebuilt wheel (should come first).
2. build from source with instructions.

Reviewer: Source build is not required for this use case as all the changes are merged. Linking to Docs should be enough if at all needed.

Reviewer 3: agree, I don't think we want to get into a src build here. Try and keep it tight. Plus the fact that it's working well OOTB is important.

Author: Link added

---
title: Setup vLLM
weight: 2

### FIXED, DO NOT MODIFY
layout: learningpathall
---

## What is vLLM

[vLLM](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/) is an open-source, high-throughput inference and serving engine for large language models (LLMs). It’s designed to maximise hardware efficiency, making LLM inference faster, more memory-efficient, and scalable.

## Understanding the models

Llama 3.1 8B is an open-weight, text-only LLM with 8 billion parameters that can understand and generate text. You can view the model card at https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B.

Whisper large V3 is an automatic speech recognition (ASR) and speech translation model. It has 1.55 billion parameters and can both transcribe many languages and translate them to English. You can find the model card at https://huggingface.co/openai/whisper-large-v3.

## Set up your environment

Before you begin, make sure your environment meets these requirements:

- Python 3.12 on Ubuntu 22.04 LTS or newer

> - At least 32 vCPUs, 96 GB RAM, and 64 GB of free disk space

Reviewer: Do we really need 96 GB Ram for the models in learning path?
If yes, I am assuming its for the quantization step and not inference itself?

Author: That's correct

This Learning Path was tested on a 96 core machine with 128-bit SVE, 192 GB of RAM and 500 GB of attached storage.

## Install build dependencies

Install the following packages required for running inference with vLLM on Arm64:
```bash
sudo apt-get update -y
sudo apt install -y python3.12-venv python3.12-dev
```

Now install tcmalloc, a fast memory allocator from Google’s gperftools, which improves performance under high concurrency:
```bash
sudo apt-get install -y libtcmalloc-minimal4
```

## Create and activate a Python virtual environment

> It’s best practice to install vLLM inside an isolated environment to prevent conflicts between system and project dependencies:

Reviewer 3: nit: `It's` => `It is`
or `It is considered`

> It’s best practice to install vLLM inside an isolated environment to prevent conflicts between system and project dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is considered best practice to install vLLM inside an isolated environment to prevent conflicts between system and project dependencies:
```

```bash
python3.12 -m venv vllm_env
source vllm_env/bin/activate
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

## Install vLLM for CPU

> Install a recent CPU specific build of vLLM:

Reviewer 3: nit: hyphen, "CPU-specific"

Reviewer 3: Also "recent" could we be more specific? Do we need to be? (e.g. >v 0.x.y)

Author: Added the hyphen and removed the word recent. I don't think we need to be more specific.

> Install a recent CPU specific build of vLLM:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install a recent CPU-specific build of vLLM:
```

```bash
export VLLM_VERSION=0.20.0
pip install https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/releases/download/v${VLLM_VERSION}/vllm-${VLLM_VERSION}+cpu-cp38-abi3-manylinux_2_35_aarch64.whl --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu
```

If you wish to build vLLM from source you can follow the instructions in the [Build and Run vLLM on Arm Servers Learning Path](/learning-paths/servers-and-cloud-computing/vllm/vllm-setup/).

## Set up access to LLama3.1-8B models

> To access the Llama models hosted by Hugging Face, you will need to install the Hugging Face CLI so that you can authenticate yourself and the harness can download what it needs. You should create an account on https://huggingface.co/ and follow the instructions [in the Hugging Face CLI guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/en/guides/cli) to set up your access token. You can then install the CLI and login:

Reviewer 3: "to set up your access token" => "to install the CLI and setup your access token"

Reviewer 3: "You can then install the CLI and login:"
Maybe...
"You can then authenticate yourself with the HuggingFace API:"

...or "you can then authenticate with HF"
...or "you can then login to HF"

```bash

> curl -LsSf https://hf.co/cli/install.sh | bash

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need this - we should just direct people to the HF docs for how to install.

Reviewer 3: it avoid us telling people to curl some script we don't own into bash
